{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.16299}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont2\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 Conservation Plant Characteristics Data Definitions\par
\par
Characteristics Data Fields\par
Characteristics Data Definitions\par
Summary\par
Morphology/Physiology\par
Growth Requirements\par
Reproduction\par
Suitability/Use\par
We have Characteristics for about 2000 conservation plant species and 500 additional cultivars. (A cultivar is a variety, strain, or race that has originated and persisted under cultivation or was specifically developed for cultivation; cultivar is the cultivated plant equivalent of botanical variety.) Mostly we have species (not cultivar) data since conservation plants are primarily native plants without named cultivars. We also have this species data for most of the plants that have cultivar data, and the data ranges for a species generally encompass the ranges for its cultivar(s). In a few cases we have cultivar data only.\par
\par
These data have been gathered from the scientific literature, gray literature, agency documents, and the knowledge of plant specialists. Characteristics data values are best viewed as approximations since they are primarily based on field observations and estimates from the literature, not precise measurements or experiments. Characteristics for the many conservation plant species native to the U.S. were typically provided by experts familiar with the species in its natural setting. Most values given apply to plants nationwide. Many values are relative to other species since absolute figures are not available. If you think the data can be improved, please contact the Data Steward.\par
Characteristics Data Fields\par
\par
Summary\par
Duration\par
Growth Habit\par
Duration\par
Native Status\par
Federal T/E Status\par
National Wetland Indicator\par
 \par
Morphology/Physiology\par
Active Growth Period\par
After Harvest Regrowth Rate\par
Bloat\par
C:N Ratio\par
Coppice Potential\par
Fall Conspicuous\par
Fire Resistant\par
Flower Color\par
Flower Conspicuous\par
Foliage Color\par
Foliage Porosity Summer\par
Foliage Porosity Winter\par
Foliage Texture\par
Fruit/Seed Color\par
Fruit/Seed Conspicuous\par
Growth Form\par
Growth Rate\par
Height at Base Age, Maximum\par
Height at Maturity\par
Known Allelopath\par
Leaf Retention\par
Lifespan\par
Low Growing Grass\par
Nitrogen Fixation\par
Resprout Ability\par
Shape and Orientation\par
Toxicity\par
 \par
Growth Requirements\par
Adapted To Coarse Textured Soils\par
Adapted To Medium Textured Soils\par
Adapted To Fine Textured Soils\par
Anaerobic Tolerance\par
CaCO3 Tolerance\par
Cold Stratification Required\par
Drought Tolerance\par
Fertility Requirement\par
Fire Tolerance\par
Frost Free Days, Minimum\par
Hedge Tolerance\par
Moisture Use\par
pH, Minimum\par
pH, Maximum\par
Planting Density Per Acre, Minimum\par
Planting Density Per Acre, Maximum\par
Precipitation, Minimum\par
Precipitation, Maximum\par
Root Depth, Minimum\par
Salinity Tolerance\par
Shade Tolerance\par
Temperature, Minimum (\'b0F)\par
 \par
Reproduction\par
Bloom Period\par
Commercial Availability\par
Fruit/Seed Abundance\par
Fruit/Seed Period Begin\par
Fruit/Seed Period End\par
Fruit/Seed Persistence\par
Propagated By Bare Root\par
Propagated By Bulbs\par
Propagated By Container\par
Propagated By Corms\par
Propagated By Cuttings\par
Propagated By Seed\par
Propagated By Sod\par
Propagated By Sprigs\par
Propagated By Tubers\par
Seed Per Pound\par
Seed Spread Rate\par
Seedling Vigor\par
Small Grain\par
Vegetative Spread Rate\par
 \par
Suitability/Use\par
Berry/Nut/Seed Product\par
Christmas Tree Product\par
Fodder Product\par
Fuelwood Product\par
Lumber Product\par
Naval Store Product\par
Nursery Stock Product\par
Palatable Browse Animal\par
Palatable Graze Animal\par
Palatable Human\par
Post Product\par
Protein Potential\par
Pulpwood Product\par
Veneer Product\par
Characteristics Data Definitions\par
\par
Summary\par
\par
Duration: From PLANTS core data set.\par
Growth Habit: From PLANTS core data set.\par
Native Status From PLANTS core data set.\par
Federal T/E Status: From PLANTS core data set, established by the USFWS.\par
National Wetland Indicator: From PLANTS core data set, established by the USFWS.\par
\par
 \par
\par
Morphology/Physiology\par
\par
Active Growth Period: Plants have their most active growth in which seasonal period?\par
\par
Spring\par
Spring & Fall\par
Spring & Summer\par
Spring, Summer & Fall\par
Summer\par
Summer & Fall\par
Fall\par
Fall, Winter & Spring\par
Year-round\par
After Harvest Regrowth Rate: What is the relative rate of regrowth of a herbaceous plant after a harvest of above ground herbage? Woody plants are left blank here.\par
\par
Slow, Moderate, Rapid\par
Bloat: What is the relative potential of an herbaceous plant to cause bloat in livestock? Woody plants are scored "None\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
C:N Ratio: C:N ratio is the percentage of organic carbon divided by the percentage of total nitrogen in organic material. We specify the organic material as either the above ground biomass of an herbaceous plant or the above ground herbaceous material of a woody plant. Our relative values correspond to these numerical ranges: Low: <23; Medium: 23 \f1\endash  59; High: >59.\par
\par
Low, Medium, High\par
Coppice Potential: Is the tree or shrub suitable for the coppice method of silviculture. Coppicing completely removes the canopy of woody plants, cutting them at or just above ground level. Plants other than trees and shrubs are scored "No" here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Fall Conspicuous: Are the leaves or fruits conspicuous during Autumn from a landscaping aesthetics standpoint?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Fire Resistant: Is the plant known to resist burning? If the plant can carry a fire\emdash and most can\emdash this value will be no. This characteristic is best evaluated with reference to problem fires in California.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Flower Color: What is the predominant color of the flowers?\par
\par
Blue\par
Brown\par
Green\par
Orange\par
Purple\par
Red\par
White\par
Yellow\par
Flower Conspicuous: Are the flowers conspicuous from a landscaping aesthetics standpoint?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Foliage Color: What is the predominant color of the foliage?\par
\par
Dark Green\par
Green\par
Gray-Green\par
Red\par
White-Gray\par
Yellow-Green\par
Foliage Porosity Summer: How porous is the foliage during the summer months?\par
\par
Porous, Moderate, Dense\par
Foliage Porosity Winter: How porous is the foliage during the winter months?\par
\par
Porous, Moderate, Dense\par
Foliage Texture: What is the general texture of the plant\rquote s foliage relative to other species with the same growth habit?\par
\par
Fine, Medium, Coarse\par
Fruit/Seed Color: What is the predominant and conspicuous color of the mature fruit or seed from a landscaping aesthetics standpoint?\par
\par
Black\par
Blue\par
Brown\par
Green\par
Orange\par
Purple\par
Red\par
White\par
Yellow\par
Fruit/Seed Conspicuous: Is the fruit or seed conspicuous from a landscaping aesthetics standpoint?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Growth Form: What is the primary growth form on the landscape in relation to soil stabilization on slopes and streamsides? Each plant species is assigned the single growth form that most enhances its ability to stabilize soil.\par
\par
Bunch: Plant development by intravaginal tillering at or near the soil surface without production of rhizomes or stolons.\par
Colonizing: A plant that is likely to behave as a colonizer when planted to enhance soil stabilization.\par
Multiple Stems: Plant development by producing two or more stems. Examples: roundleaf dogwood (Cornus rugosa) and red huckleberry (Vaccinium parvifolium).\par
Rhizomatous: Plant development by the production of rhizomes which give rise to vegetative spread.\par
Single Crown: A herbaceous plant that develops one persistent base.\par
Single Stem: Plant development by the production of one stem. Examples: corn (Zea mays) and American beech (Fagus grandifolia).\par
Stoloniferous: Plant development by the production of stolons which give rise to vegetative spread.\par
Thicket Forming: A plant that is likely to develop thickets when planted to stabilize soil.\par
Growth Rate: What is the growth rate after successful establishment relative to other species with the same growth habit?\par
\par
Slow, Moderate, Rapid\par
Height at Base Age, Maximum: Maximum height (in feet) of a tree, shrub or sub-shrub, under ideal conditions, at a base age. The base age is 20 years for trees in temperate areas (>30 degrees north latitude), 10 years for trees in tropical areas (\f2\u8804?\f0 30 degrees north latitude), and 10 years for all shrubs and sub-shrubs. Ideal conditions are defined as soil pH = 5.0-7.8; soil salinity \f2\u8804?\f0  4 mmhos/cm; soil depth \f2\u8805?\f0  40 inches; effective average annual precipitation \f2\u8805?\f0  30 inches; soil texture class = medium; no ponding; rare or no annual flooding; and high water table depth \f2\u8805?\f0  1 foot during plant active growth period. Plants other than trees, shrubs, and sub-shrubs are left blank here.\par
\par
Height at Maturity: Expected height (in feet) of plant at maturity. This is an estimate of the median mature height of all plants of a species or cultivar. Within a species mature height is quite variable, so this estimate is provided only to give a rough idea for planning purposes.\par
\par
Known Allelopath: Has this plant species been shown to be allelopathic to at least one other species?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Leaf Retention: Does the tree, shrub, or sub-shrub retain its leaves year round? Plants with other growth habits are scored "No" here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Lifespan: What is the expected lifespan (in years) of a perennial plant relative to other species with the same growth habit? For the Tree growth habit: Short: < 100; Moderate: 100 - 250; Long: >250. Life spans for other growth habits are not quantified.\par
\par
Short, Moderate, Long\par
Low Growing Grass: Does the growing point (terminal meristem) of the vegetative grass tiller remain either at or near the crown? Plants other than grasses are scored "No" here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Nitrogen Fixation: How much nitrogen is fixed by this plant in monoculture? Our relative values correspond to these numerical ranges: None: 0 lb. N/acre/year; 0<Low<85; Medium: 85-160; High: >160.\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Resprout Ability: Will the woody perennial resprout following top (above ground biomass) removal? Herbaceous plants are scored "No\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Shape and Orientation: What is the growth form or predominant shape of an individual plant? (This characteristic is especially useful for selecting species for windbreaks.)\par
\par
Climbing\par
Columnar\par
Conical\par
Decumbent\par
Erect\par
Irregular\par
Oval\par
Prostrate\par
Rounded\par
Semi-Erect\par
Vase\par
Toxicity: What is the relative toxicity of the plant to either humans or livestock?\par
\par
None, Slight, Moderate, Severe\par
 \par
\par
Growth Requirements\par
\par
Adapted To Coarse Textured Soils: Can this plant establish and grow in soil with a coarse textured surface layer? See table below for more information.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Adapted To Medium Textured Soils: Can this plant establish and grow in soil with a medium textured surface layer? See table below for more information.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Adapted To Fine Textured Soils: Can this plant establish and grow in soil with a fine textured surface layer? See table below for more information.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Characteristics soil texture groups and corresponding soil texture classes.\par
Characteristics soil texture group\tab Corresponding soil texture classes from the Soil Texture Triangle\par
Coarse\tab Sand\tab Coarse sand\tab Fine sand\par
Coarse\tab Loamy coarse sand\tab Loamy fine sand\tab Loamy very fine sand\par
Coarse\tab Very fine sand\tab Loamy sand\tab  \par
Medium\tab Silt\tab Sandy clay loam\tab Very fine sandy loam\par
Medium\tab Silty clay loam\tab Silt loam\tab Loam\par
Medium\tab Fine sandy loam\tab Sandy loam\tab Coarse sandy loam\par
Medium\tab Clay loam\tab  \tab  \par
Fine\tab Sandy clay\tab Silty clay\tab Clay\par
Source: The soil texture classes are from the Soil Science Society of America, \par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.soils.org/ }}{\fldrslt{http://www.soils.org/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 . An NRCS team partitioned the soil textures into the three groups.\par
Anaerobic Tolerance: What is the relative tolerance to anaerobic soil conditions?\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
CaCO3 Tolerance: What is the relative tolerance to calcareous soil? We define calcareous soil as soil containing sufficient free CaCO3 and other carbonates to effervesce visibly or audibly when treated with cold 0.1M HCl. These soils usually contain from 10 to almost 1000g/kg CaCO3 equivalent.\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Cold Stratification Required: Will cold stratification significantly increase the seed germination percentage of this plant?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Drought Tolerance: What is the relative tolerance of the plant to drought conditions compared to other species with the same growth habit from the same geographical region? Drought tolerance is defined here in the following fashion: Imagine that in an acre of land there are low areas that have heavy soil and tend to accumulate more soil moisture, and higher areas that have coarse textured soil and tend to accumulate less soil moisture. Some plant species are most frequently found growing in the higher areas with the coarse soil texture. These plant species are considered to be more drought tolerant than the species that are frequently found in the low areas with fine textured soil.\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Fertility Requirement: What relative level of nutrition (N, P, K) is required for normal growth and development?\par
\par
Low, Medium, High\par
Fire Tolerance: What is the relative ability to resprout, regrow, or reestablish from residual seed after a fire?\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Frost Free Days, Minimum: The minimum average number of frost-free days within the plant\rquote s known geographical range. For cultivars, the geographical range is defined as the area to which the cultivar is well adapted rather than marginally adapted.\par
\par
Hedge Tolerance: What is the relative tolerance of woody perennials to hedging (close cropping) by livestock or wildlife? Herbaceous plants are scored "None\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Moisture Use: Ability to use (i.e., remove) available soil moisture relative to other species in the same (or similar) soil moisture availability region.\par
\par
Low, Medium, High\par
pH, Minimum: The minimum soil pH, of the top 12 inches of soil, within the plant\rquote s known geographical range. For cultivars, the geographical range is defined as the area to which the cultivar is well adapted rather than marginally adapted.\par
\par
pH, Maximum: The maximum soil pH, of the top 12 inches of soil, within the plant\rquote s known geographical range. For cultivars, the geographical range is defined as the area to which the cultivar is well adapted rather than marginally adapted.\par
\par
Planting Density Per Acre, Minimum: Recommended minimum number of individual plants to plant per acre.\par
\par
Planting Density Per Acre, Maximum: Recommended maximum number of individual plants to plant per acre.\par
\par
Precipitation, Minimum: Minimum tolerable rainfall (in inches), expressed as the average annual minimum precipitation that occurs 20% of the time (i.e., the probability of it being this dry in any given year is 20%) at the driest climate station within the known geographical range of the plant. For cultivars, the geographical range is defined as the area to which the cultivar is well adapted rather than marginally adapted.\par
\par
Precipitation, Maximum: Maximum tolerable rainfall (in inches), expressed as the annual average precipitation of the wettest climate station within the known geographical range of the plant. For cultivars, the geographical range is defined as the area to which the cultivar is well adapted rather than marginally adapted.\par
\par
Root Depth, Minimum: The minimum depth of soil (in inches) required for good growth. Plants that do not have roots such as rootless aquatic plants (floating or submerged) and epiphytes are assigned a minimum root depth value of zero.\par
\par
Salinity Tolerance: What is the plant\rquote s tolerance to soil salinity? Tolerance to a soil salinity level is defined as only a slight reduction (not greater than 10%) in plant growth. None = tolerant to a soil with an electrical conductivity of the soil solution extract of 0-2 dS/m; Low = tolerant to 2.1-4.0 dS/m; Medium = tolerant to 4.1-8.0 dS/m; High = tolerant to greater than 8.0 dS/m.\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Shade Tolerance: What is the relative tolerance to shade conditions?\par
\par
Intolerant, Intermediate, Tolerant\par
Temperature, Minimum (\'b0F): The minimum tolerable temperature is the lowest temperature recorded in the plant\rquote s historical range. If this is not available, the record low January temperature recorded at climate stations within the current geographical range of the plant is used. This definition does not apply to summer annuals.\par
\par
 \par
\par
Reproduction\par
\par
Bloom Period: During what seasonal period in the U.S. does the plant bloom the most? The bloom period is defined as the time when pollen is shed and stigmas are receptive.\par
\par
Spring\par
Early Spring\par
Mid Spring\par
Late Spring\par
Summer\par
Early Summer\par
Mid Summer\par
Late Summer\par
Fall\par
Winter\par
Late Winter\par
Indeterminate\par
Commercial Availability: What is the availability of plant propagules in the commercial marketplace?\par
\par
No known source\par
Routinely available\par
Contracting only: available only through contracting with a commercial grower\par
Field collections only: not produced by commercial growers\par
Fruit/Seed Abundance: What is the amount of seed produced by the plant compared to other species with the same growth habit?\par
\par
None, Low, Medium, High\par
Fruit/Seed Period Begin: Season in which the earliest fruit or seed of the fruit/seed period is visually obvious.\par
\par
Spring\par
Summer\par
Fall\par
Winter\par
Year-round\par
Fruit/Seed Period End: Season in which the latest fruit or seed of the fruit/seed period is visually obvious.\par
\par
Spring\par
Summer\par
Fall\par
Winter\par
Year-round\par
Fruit/Seed Persistence: Are the fruit or seed generally recognized as being persistent on the plant?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Bare Root: Is it practical to propagate this plant as a bare root product?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Bulbs: Is it practical to propagate this plant as bulbs?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Container: Does the plant lend itself to being developed as a container product?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Corms: Is it practical to propagate this plant as corms?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Cuttings: Is it practical to propagate this plant as either stem or root cuttings?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Seed: Is it practical to propagate this plant by seed?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Sod: Does the plant lend itself to being developed as a sod product?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Sprigs: Is it practical to propagate this plant by sprigs?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Propagated By Tubers: Is it practical to propagate this plant by tubers?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Seed Per Pound: How many seeds per pound are in an average seed lot?\par
\par
Seed Spread Rate: What is the capability of the plant to spread through its seed production compared to other species with the same growth habit?\par
\par
None, Slow, Moderate, Rapid\par
Seedling Vigor: What is the expected seedling survival percentage of the plant compared to other species with the same growth habit?\par
\par
Low, Medium, High\par
Small Grain: Is this plant a small grain?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Vegetative Spread Rate: At what rate can this plant can spread compared to other species with the same growth habit?\par
\par
None, Slow, Moderate, Rapid\par
 \par
\par
Suitability/Use\par
\par
Berry/Nut/Seed Product: Is the woody perennial suitable for the commercial production of either berries, nuts, or seeds? Herbaceous plants are scored "No\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Christmas Tree Product: Is the plant known to be suitable for the Christmas tree market?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Fodder Product: Is the plant known to be used as animal fodder material? The definition of fodder from the Crop Science Society of America is: Coarse grasses such as corn or sorghum harvested with the seed and leaves green or alive, then cured and fed in their entirety as forage.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Fuelwood Product: What is the relative suitability or potential of this tree or shrub to produce fuelwood? If suitability is unknown, we have expressed fuelwood potential in terms of weight (in lbs) per cubic foot of green wood. Our relative values correspond to these numerical ranges: Low: <28; Medium: 28-35; High: >35. Plants other than trees and shrubs are left blank here.\par
\par
Low, Medium, High\par
Lumber Product: Is the plant suitable, or does it have potential, for use as a commercial lumber producer?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Naval Store Product: Is the woody perennial suitable for production of naval store products? Navel Store Products are defined as tar, pitch, turpentine, pine oil, rosin, and terpenes obtained from pine and other coniferous trees. Herbaceous plants are scored "No\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Nursery Stock Product: Is the plant suitable for production of nursery stock?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Palatable Browse Animal: What is the relative palatability of this plant to browsing animals?\par
\par
Low, Moderate, High\par
Palatable Grazing Animals: What is the relative palatability of this plant to grazing animals?\par
\par
Low, Moderate, High\par
Palatable Human: Does the plant produce berries, nuts, seeds, or fruits that are palatable to humans?\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Post Product: Is the tree or shrub commonly used or does it have high potential for the production of posts, poles, mine timbers, or railroad ties? Plants other than trees and shrubs are scored \ldblquote No\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Protein Potential: What is the relative protein content of the plant parts that are grazed or browsed by animals?\par
\par
Low, Moderate, High\par
Pulpwood Product: Is the woody perennial commonly used or does it have high potential to be used for the production of pulpwood? Herbaceous plants are scored "No" here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\par
Veneer Product: Is the tree commonly used or does it have high potential to be used for commercial veneer or plywood? Plants other than trees are scored \ldblquote No\rdblquote  here by default.\par
\par
Yes, No\lang9\par
}
 